It’s that time of the year again when all the best scholarships and opportunities open for application. We know how difficult it can be to find the one that is best suited to you and your plans for study. Here’s a list of some of the best undergraduate and postgraduate opportunities for African students. You have nothing to lose. Get applying! Ashinaga Africa Initiative for Undergraduate Students, 2019 The Ashinaga Africa Initiative is open to orphan applicants of Sub-Saharan Africa. The Ashinaga scholarship covers tuition, accommodation, travel costs, and other necessary fees. The aim of the scholarship is contributing to Sub-Saharan Africa’s long-term development by empowering a generation of future leaders. Applicants must have lost one or both parents, be 23 or younger having been born on or before October 1, 1995, have graduated high school within the past two years and be committed to returning to Sub-Saharan Africa once they have finished their studies abroad. Find out more here. [Application close December 16, 2018] Yale Young African Scholars Program, 2019 The Yale Young African Scholars Program – an official program by Yale University – is an academic and enrichment program designed for African secondary school students planning to pursue tertiary education and become young leaders on the continent. Participants will enhance their academic skills, receive university admission and financial aid application guidance, join a network of young African leaders, and be paired with mentors who will help advise them throughout the university application process. There is no tuition cost to students to participate in it. To apply, you must be least 14 years old by application deadline, be fluent in English, be a citizen or permanent resident of an African country and currently attend school in an African country. For more information and to apply, click here.[Applications close February 6, 2019]. International Undergraduate Scholarship at University of Sheffield in UK, 2019 The University of Sheffield is inviting applications for the International Undergraduate Scholarship for the year 2019. Scholarships are available to new international (non-EU) students. Students may be required to take an internationally recognised English language test such as IELTS.if you keep your grades up. Find out more here [Applications close June 14, 2019]. 2019 iThemba LABS PHYSICS SUMMER SCHOOL The Summer School is intended for students who intend to pursue postgraduate training in nuclear sciences: to attend introductory theory lectures on instrumentation and obtain hands-on experience on the equipment available at iThemba LABS. It will comprise of a three-week training program. The summer school is intended for all students who intend to register in 2019 at a South African or other African university, for one of the following postgraduate degrees: Honours; Masters; or Doctoral degree. Completed application forms, with the six mandatory attachments, must be emailed to: Ms Sive Stofile (sive.stofile@nrf.ac.za) and Mr Stephen Dlamini (Dlamini@nrf.ac.za). [Applications must be submitted by 26 November 2018]. Monash South Africa Postgraduate Diploma in Business Leadership in South Africa, 2018 Monash South Africa is providing learning opportunities for the highest achieving students to pursue a postgraduate degree program.The purpose of this scholarship is to support the students to study a postgraduate degree program at the university. The scholarship is available to study any subjects offered by the university and will cover the 15% tuition fee for all enrolled units during 2018 academic year. See here for additional information. [Applications close November 30, 2018]. WISE – Futures PhD Scholarship Opportunities at NM-AIST in Tanzania, 2019 The African centre of excellence on Water Infrastructure and Sustainable Energy Futures (WISE – Futures) at Nelson Mandela African Institution of Science and Technology in Arusha, Tanzania is inviting applications for the WISE – Futures PhD scholarships. Scholarships are open to African students with preference given to female students. These will be awarded in three key areas: water and sanitation, water resources, and energy. PhD students will be awarded the partial scholarships to run for three years. For more information, see here.  [Applications close November 30, 2018]. 220 Masters Scholarships for Developing Countries in Belgium, 2019-2020 Each year, ARES awards an average of 150 scholarships for masters and 70 scholarships for internships for nationals of the global South. Students of Benin, Bolivia, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cuba, Ecuador, Ethiopia ( only for training in English ), Haiti, Madagascar, Morocco, Niger, Peru, Philippines, DR Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Vietnam can apply for these scholarships. Applicants must have a good knowledge of written and spoken French. Scholarships are available for pursuing masters and training programmes in Belgium.
More information can be found here.  [Applications close January 11, 2019 and February 8, 2019]. ICTP CMSP Postdoctoral Fellowships for International Students in Developing Countries, 2019 ICTP seeks applications for postdoctoral positions starting in fall 2019 from outstanding young scientists of any nationality with a strong research record. ICTP offers internationally competitive remuneration and a number of benefits. Appointments will be made for two years, with the possibility of renewal for a further year. Fellows must have completed a PhD in physics or related disciplines prior to the start of their Fellowship. Adequate proficiency in the English language is required. Preference will be given to applicants in the areas of expertise of the CMSP group; candidates who have obtained their PhD after 2014 will be given priority. Find out more here. [Applications close January 15, 2019]. Ingvar Kamprad Master Scholarship for International Students at Lund University in Sweden, 2019 For 2019, the Lund University is offering Ingvar Kamprad Master Scholarship to high achieving Non-EU or EU applicants. The aim of the scholarship is to support two students enrolled in the Master’s degree programme in Industrial Design. The scholarship is SEK 100 000 per year (about EUR 10 000), to cover the cost of living and accommodation for ten months, from August to May, during the two years of study.  See here for more information. [Applications close January 15, 2019]. Mastercard Scholarships for Sub-Saharan Africans at Sciences Po in France, 2019 The Sciences Po and the Mastercard Foundation is inviting applications for up to 120 Mastercard Scholars to study at Sciences Po. Full scholarships are available to students from sub-Saharan African countries. This program aims to recruit talented students who aspire to shape the future of the African continent and help them develop their full potential. Scholarships are available to study undergraduate, graduate and summer programs. See here for more information.  [Applications close from January 15 2019 – February 18, 2019 depending on which program you’re applying to]. NEH Senior Research Fellowship Program for Foreign Students, 2019 The Council of American Overseas Research Centers (CAORC) is now accepting applications for NEH Senior Research Fellowship Program in the humanities. The US as well as foreign nationals, are eligible to apply for this fellowship program. Applicants whose first language is not English are usually required to provide evidence of proficiency in English at the higher level required by the University. The NEH Senior Research Fellowship supports advanced research in the humanities. Fields of study include, but are not limited to, history, philosophy, religious studies, literature, literary criticism, and visual and performing arts. In addition, research that embraces a humanistic approach and methods will be considered. See here for more information. For more information, click here.  [Applications close January 24, 2019]. CSIR – DST Inter-Programme Postgraduate Bursary Support, 2018 The Department of Science and Technology (DST) has recently launched its inter-programme postgraduate bursary support scheme. It is targeting full-time students studying towards an Honours, Masters or PhD degree at any South African public university studying toward tech- or science-related fields. The amounts per annum for bursaries awarded are as follows: Honours: R75 000, Masters: R100 000 and PhD: R130 000. For more information, see here. [Applications open August 2018] UJ Online Masters Programmes, 2018 The University of Johannesburg is offering the first-of-its-kind, completely online programmes which allows working professionals who want to advance their career to balance personal obligations as well. The modules are completely online with no face-to-face sessions, there is no travel required. Registered students will be able to pay per module, study on own schedules and have access to full academic support. There are six different start dates in the year and courses range from public health to public management and governance to education in communication and information technology. For more information, click here.  [Applications open throughout 2018]. Embassy of France in South Africa PhD Grants, 2018 The French Embassy in South Africa is offering academic grants research in to facilitate in academic and scientific mobility. The program offers the opportunity for doctoral students to integrate into French establishments for specified time periods in order to participate in collaborative research as part of their doctoral research project. Grants are awarded for a stay in France of 3 to 6 months per year, renewable for up to three year. Funding will be offered for to cover some or all of the following expenses during the stay in France: round-trip airfare, health insurance, a monthly stipend towards living expenses and Schengen visa fees. Click here to find out more.  [Applications open throughout 2018]. Good luck!  via GIPHY