Ziyaad Fredericks is a young footballer from Eldorado Park who has been given the opportunity to trial in the United States of America in 2019. The trip to the US is extremely expensive, and his family are helping him to raise funds for the trip. Growing up in Eldorado Park in the South of Johannesburg, Fredericks started playing soccer when he was seven-years-old. He has played in some of the biggest youth tournaments, and even represented the University of Johannesburg (UJ) in the 2017-2018 season. Now he wants to expand his dreams even more: “I hope to complete my education while playing soccer for the university. Hopefully thereafter I want to get drafted to a MLS team,” he says. Fredericks has been invited to go the US to trial at a few American universities over a period of 10 days. A successful trial would not only mean that he would have the opportunity to play soccer professionally, but also to receive a quality tertiary education. “The opportunity means I get to further my studies in a foreign country and I actually get a to grow as a person and fulfil my childhood dreams of becoming a professional football player,” he says.   The almighty knows best! A post shared by  Ziyaad fredericks (@just_ziyaad_) on Jul 26, 2018 at 5:07am PDT  Zayd Fredericks, Ziyaad’s father says they are humbled as a family with incredible family, friends, and colleagues who have supported him. “We stand together in opening another door of opportunity for our son from Eldo’s and the many more to follow him from our area in pursuit of ” route to professionalism,” Zayd has appealed to all to help his family with the fundraising for the trial, saying he is very proud of his son who managed to balance and soccer throughout the years – achieving good results all around. Fredericks’ coach at Stars of Africa Football Academy,  Farouk Khan says this is a huge opportunity for the player to enhance his football potential, and further his studies. ”He must keep the Stars South Africa flag flying high like so many of his teammates that have represented South Africa at the highest level,” he says. Khan also encouraged Ziyaad to keep his discipline – something the academy teaches – on and off the pitch when he goes to US but says: “He is a very coachable player. He is very hardworking and has a lot of skills, and all the attributes that will allow him to be a great player in the future.” “In the area of Eldorado Park, there are lots of youngsters who have supported me and looked up to me as an inspiration. I would like to make them proud including my friends and family,” says Fredericks about why he wants to do well during his trip. The donations that the family is asking for would be a support towards his airfare, accommodation and living expenses during his trials. The costs of the trip would entail R30 500.00 per athlete including confirmed tryouts with a minimum of 5 universities, car hire and driving athletes to and from tryouts, travel and training gear, as well as return Flights to the USA which are R14 864.68 per athlete. Help out Ziyaad to make his dreams come through by contributing here.