Looking at the results by the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (Pirls) and Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study, which were released in 2015, shows that the quality of our basic education is poor, writes SAKHIWE KOKELA. The results show that South Africa is one of the countries that performed below when tested. For example, out of 50 countries that participated in Pirls, South Africa was placed in the lower rank. Since 1994, each introduced education policy such as the Outcomes Based Education, National Curriculum Statements/Revised National Curriculum Statement; failed to achieve expected outcomes. For example, learners that received good results when leaving grade 12 basic education system, besides in international tests, environments such as universities, job markets and business proved that such learners were struggling to cope in the post basic education system which means the policies were not achieving good outcomes. The main problem is inability to deal with the implementation of the basic education policy. Currently, it is important to strategically focus on improving the implementation of the latest introduced basic education policy known as the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements (CAPS), in order to ensure it improves our basic education system. The research report; ‘Implementation Evaluation of the National Curriculum Statement Grade R to 12 Focusing on the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements (CAPS)’, dated 25th May 2017, and my master’s dissertation, titled: ‘An Analysis of the implementation of the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement in the Further Education and Training Phase’, dated January 2017; present research findings vis-à-vis the context of CAPS implementation. The findings assist in understanding the implementation gaps of CAPS. For example, the research report reveal time management as poor in 18 out of 24 schools. Schools time tables correspond with CAPS requirements, however in reality that is not the case as teachers do not consistently attend to teaching in classes. Besides, there is still shortage of learning tools such as textbooks for mathematics and calculators. Furthermore, there is lack of clarity in many schools with the use of assessments to improve teaching and learning. Writing is also an issue as there are no much topics covered in order to ensure learners get writing skills and the district is blamed for possessing weak instructional leadership in writing. With regard to teaching, teachers lack in ensuring learners understand the concepts and procedures in subjects. Thus, there are gaps which are costly such as shortage of materials and gaps which requires less or no additional cost such as incompetency. Practices that links with incompetency include improper attending of duties among the subject advisors, teachers and other department of basic education (DBE) officials, poor leadership in the department, the provision of posts through corruption than on merit. An example of an implementation gap that would could be fixed at little to no additional cost is human factors – such as someone in power acting inconsiderately in their job. Therefore the government should initially act on such gaps. As a consequence, the implementation of CAPS will be ineffective if such implementation gaps are not aggressively fixed. These gaps have been ever-present in all our post-1994 education policies.
Public officials’ skills should be supplemented with leadership skills and competency which makes it easy to serve the public for the purpose of human development and eventually, we can establish a conducive environment for successful implementation of national education policy. Besides, to ensure leadership skills and competency is fairly considered in practices meant for the implementation of CAPS, applicable strategies in support of leadership and competency should be designed through recommendations founded in the above stated research documents. If necessary, recommendations from other research documents that focus on analysing the implementation of CAPS can be considered. Fixing the implementation gaps saves resources and improves the efficient and effective implementation of basic education policy. The quality of education then improves. For example, if the implementation of CAPS is facilitated by employees with relevant expertise that include leadership skill, who are committed to implement it accordingly; it follows that the implementation of CAPS improves, and the resources allocated for the implementation phase are used efficiently. If there is a delivery of computers and books (an example of high cost implementation gaps), the skilled and committed officials of the DBE can utilise such high cost material effectively and efficiently to avoid poor usage in class and failure to deliver in schools. There are schools in Gauteng which were provided with tablets in order to improve learners’ skills in technology, however if teachers are not competent to use such tablets it becomes a waste of resources. If low or no additional cost implementation gaps persist under CAPS, it will experience ineffectiveness similar to previous basic education policies. Learners will continue to suffer from poor education. The DBE will lose great resources on those implementation gaps as wages will be paid to officials that lack commitment, expertise and leadership skills. Sakhiwe Kokela is an Associate Researcher at the Auwal Socio-Economic Research Institute The views expressed in this article are the author’s own and do not necessarily reflect the editorial policies of The Daily Vox.