Playing the violin takes time, hard work and of course, money. Violinist Kabelo Motlhomi (31) can attest to this. But it’s a beautiful instrument that is rewarding to play and delightful to listen to. As a freelance musician in Johannesburg, Motlhomi plays for different orchestras, his own musical groups and is a violin teacher as well. Hailing from Diepkloof, Soweto this is his story. I started on the violin at the age of 10. It was a hot summer day and my friends and I were kicking some ball. My friends were late for rehearsals for a violin lesson. I knew nothing about the violin, literally nothing. We were probably so dirty but my friends were late and had to leave straight for the lesson. I followed them. When I got there, I heard the violin and I just fell in love with it. I remember I begged for lessons. I didn’t know after 21 years, I’d find myself a violinist. I just wanted to be able to play as good as my friends. I practised every day and what helped was that I had a very good teacher. I think I could have worked even harder, I’m sure everyone would say that about themselves. Luckily, I was talented which helped. But it took a lot of discipline. I also had violin lessons at school, I did music as part of my matric subjects. During breaks instead of going outside and kicking football, I would be inside practising. At some point I had to choose what was important. I had already broken my leg playing football and I wanted to study music. I had to choose: I was either a violinist or I was playing football.  When I studied, I didn’t know that I would find myself in Manchester. I went to the Royal Northern College of Manchester. I studied with a gentleman called Jonathan Morton. My teacher was great, he always looked out for me. The most important thing that helped me develop is that my teacher was everything I wanted to sound like as a musician. Whatever he said, I went and did it. I trusted him. It’s important to have a good teacher and trust what they say. Growing up, there was always music playing at home. My grandfather loved jazz. My mother listened to a lot of the commercial stuff like R&B. I wasn’t aware of it but as soon as I started playing the instrument I could reflect on the kind of music I liked. I’m a huge jazz fan even though I studied classical music. I play all shows. At one point, I found myself playing some hip hop with Kwesta, then some jazz with some Sibongile Khumalo or Bra Hugh Masekela https://www.thedailyvox.co.za/memory-hugh-masekela-5-favourite-songs/ and then I’m at the Johannesburg Philharmonic Orchestra (JPO) playing some classical music. In Memory of Hugh Masekela: our 5 favourite songs  I started at the JPO in 2012. I auditioned for the backseat and now I’m in front after working really hard. The JPO helped me musically and instilled a lot of confidence in me. When you are young playing at the back you wonder, how are these people playing such difficult music? I can’t really really say I’m in a comfortable place now but I have the experience. I know I can play just as well as anyone else.  The JPO also helped me gain the confidence to start my own quartet. I’ve got a very successful quartet and duo which I make most of my living from. Besides my work, along with the JPO and in my personal capacity, we do a lot of gigs at underprivileged schools where we showcase our instruments. I teach in Soweto where I try to get young underprivileged kids to learn to play an instrument. Music lessons come at a high cost, some of those kids can’t afford to pay for them. I do it because I know I didn’t come from a rich background. I had help so I’m trying to give help. If I had advice for young musicians, I’d say it’s important work hard. If you work hard at a young age, you’ll reap the rewards as an adult. Working hard means practising your instrument. A lot of kids these days don’t practise enough. Work on your craft, work everyday on your craft. Pictures supplied.