When we thought premier of the Western Cape and professional troll Helen Zille had said it all, this morning she questioned the families of the Life Esidimeni victims.  We know this was not the first of her disturbing, insensitive tweets. She has already exposed herself as a anti-black colonial sympathiser. Some might dismiss her crassness on twitter as trolling but it is a problem and the more we feed the trolls, the larger they get. If you want her out your life, here is how you do it: Completely block Helen from your social media  One of the most effective and easiest ways of sanitising Helen from your aura is blocking her from social media. Go onto twitter and look for you problematic fave. After you’re in her profile, find the drop down tab and BLOCK HER. That way she won’t even come up on your TL if your friend responds to her tweets. Next, go to her page on Facebook. Repeat what you did with twitter. Well done, you now won’t see her posts on Facebook. Hide Helen’s name In Google Chrome (using seo tags)  via GIPHY While you’re surfing the internet, you might come across an article written about or by Zille. Unfortunately, people still give this quintessentially white politician the platform to vomit her bigotry on to so we have to take things into our own hands. This is why browser extensions are great. Block Site, is a Chrome extension that allows you to manually add in names that you want blocked. For this specific extension, you would need to go to settings then the adult control tab. Here you have to find ‘Block URL’s by specific words’. My suggestion is add search engine optimization tags like: Helen Zille, Zille, Premier of the Western Cape, Western Cape premier, WC Premier, and GodZille. Institute the ‘fine jar’ system  via GIPHY This would take you stating to everyone in your circle that you are practicing self care and expelling Helen Zille from your life. Tweet it, make it a Facebook status, and tag your friends just so they know. If anyone violates your wishes, whip out your fine jar, and insist they contribute to your therapy sessions. R50 if anybody brings her up in your presence.