What A Time To Be Alone: The Slumflower’s Guide To Why You Are Already Enough is a delightful guide to self love and acceptance sprinkled with Igbo proverbs and beautiful design and illustration. Written by Nigerian-British blogger and writer Chidera Eggerue, the book isn’t designed to “fix” anybody. “I want people to use the book as a mirror that they can hold up in front of themselves and be able to address their own behaviours,” Eggerue said in an interview with The Daily Vox. The book is packed with important lessons, here are 11 that resonated. The Slumflower Speaks About Self Love And Her Book ‘What A Time To Be Alone’  Other people are going to disappoint you, it’s a bitter pill to swallow but it’s true. Love yourself, care for yourself, rely on yourself, improve yourself. It’s always scary to start something new: what if you fail? There will always be variables you cannot control but it’s important to focus on what you can control. As Eggerue’s father always told her: “Finish being where you are first, it will all make sense later.” The world is centred in a certain way so that certain people are treated better than others socially, politically and economically. Whiteness is a privilege. Prettiness is a privilege. Growing up in a country that isn’t wartorn is a privilege. Admit your privilege and unlearn the entitlement that comes with it. Be kind to people, but don’t expect anything in return. Actually, don’t expect them to react in any certain way. At the same time, when other people show you kindness, express your gratitude because you are not entitled to another person’s kindness. At the same time, there are no rewards for a saviour complex. No matter how good your intentions are, you can’t fix anyone. Be compassionate but it’s not your duty to save anyone from their own unsolved trauma. Always remember, you need you more than anyone else could ever need you, Eggerue says. We live in an age where it’s cool to be unbothered. Contrary to the trend, it’s not that cool to be apathetic, it means you’re dead inside. You don’t have to pretend that you don’t care if you do. Emotions are not that scary. You do not owe anyone ‘pretty’- whichever state you choose to show up in will always be enough. You are worthy already. Put your peace of mind first. This means protecting your space and paying attention to yourself, giving yourself love and attention. It also means not giving people a second chance at violating you. It’s your life, you dictate your standards. Having high standards doesn’t mean you’re selfish or that you’re picky. Your standards are a recognition of your worth. Relevance offline is key. It’s always nice to be admired but how do you make people feel when they’re with you? That’s what you’ll be remembered for. “Your tombstone will commemorate the energy you left behind,” Eggerue says.   The book is available at most good bookstores and online  for R250. Featured image by Tom Oldham