The Daily Vox aims to put the young citizen at the centre of news. This does not mean we are a team of citizen journalists. Instead, our journalists place people at the centre of the agenda. We are a digital first online publication with content that ranges from longform written pieces to podcasts and multimedia packages. We are looking for a kickass mid-level digital media specialist with marketing and online ad sales skills to join our team. You’ll be responsible for: developing, initiating, creating and overseeing short to long-term digital marketing campaign solutions; liaising with our IT solutions partner to help us better utilise our digital platforms; developing and executing a sales strategy for our platform. We’re looking for someone with experience in marketing, social and digital media, digital content production, and sales who can help us take our site to the next level. Key Accountabilities: Develop and implement online marketing strategies. Develop and implement a sales strategy by aggressively prospecting, developing and closing leads using a variety of online and offline sources. Improve search engine optimization and general discovery of content by target groups. Analyze and report on web traffic, analytics, and engagement. Monitor prevailing and emerging digital and social media trends and services and develop innovative ways to improve and popularize The Daily Vox. Business analysis, conceptualization and formulation of specifications for digital media projects. Web development liaison between editorial and IT staff. Qualifications: A suitable marketing / sales / online journalism / digital media production qualification. At least 5 years of experience in either digital marketing, sales, content production, web design and social media. The ability to find and implement digital solutions and workarounds in an agile news environment. [Accounting/Finance experience not required, but would be super useful] Remuneration: Commensurate with the relevant experience. Send: A CV and cover letter to: info@thedailyvox.co.za, please include #DigitalManager2018 in the subject line. Deadline: 15 October 2018