Everyone knows that the Beyhive is probably one of the most ruthless stan bases in the entertainment industry. Many people who tried to come for Beyonce have experienced that harsh stings of the of the Hive, because our queen is important and we need to protect her at all costs. But this doesn’t mean that Queen Bey herself is immune to its sting. She also has received her fair share dragging from her own stan base. MIHLALI NTSABO rounds up four hilarious moments when the Beyhive dragged Beyonce. When Beyonce announced she was going vegan Remember when the game-changing collaboration between Beyonce and Nicki Minaj in “Feeling Myself” dropped and we couldn’t get over the BFF moments between the two which brought the Barbz and Beyhive closer? If you still remember that video or might have data to live stream it, you will recall that there was a moment when Beyonce and Nicki were both eating burgers, and never mind the fact that they made it look so cool.  via GIPHY A few days after that, Beyonce hyped up the Hive when she said she had an “amazing announcement” to tell her fans only for her to announce that she was vegan, which really angered the Beyhive. Hype man of the year award goes to #GMA marketing team for this #Beyonce diet nonsense #nobodycares #gmabeyonce — Marcus E. Anderson (@ihaveajrnow) June 8, 2015  That’s it?Well I was waiting for a freaking big news Bey…I’m kind of dissappoint tbh… #Beyonce #BeyHive — Nad ♛ 49 (@NadParrilla) June 8, 2015  Although the Beyhive now gets excited seeing the power of Vegan Beyonce, it sure got her dragged at first. Anyone else considering going vegan after witnessing the power of Vegan Beyoncé? — Danez Smith (@Danez_Smif) April 15, 2018  Beyoncé please let me know how to get that flat stomach/fat ass/thick thighs combo is it the veganism because I will become vegan — calkie $wag di$trict (@Calkielator_97) April 15, 2018  When she said her mom was corny and embarrasses her Tina Knowles, grandmother to the Beyhive, has become the Hive’s fave Instagram user, especially with her random and sometimes funny posts. However, according to Beyonce’s mother, Beyonce found her mother’s instagram posts and “corny jokes” quite embarrassing and the Hive did not appreciate that. Without her being born on this day we would not have a Beyoncé in our lives! Let that sink in… 
Thank you so much for giving us the legend. We love you & your corny jokes Ms Tina Knowles Lawson. Keep slaying girl. God bless you! #HappyBirthdayTina  pic.twitter.com/TCix646bbu — VISH (@yasiru_vismini) January 4, 2018  Beyoncé honestly should mind her own business and leave her mama alone. I miss Tina’s corny jokes already. — melissa (@SPITONMEBEYONCE) March 17, 2017  When the Beyhive told Beyonce to mind her own business Remember the time when Beyonce said that her fans should back off a bit and stop attacking people who are not fond of her? Yeah, that really didn’t sit well with the Hive and they ended up telling her to mind her own damn business and let them do their job, which is coming for everyone who speaks ill of her. is it true beyoncé once told her fans to stop having stan wars and her fans told her to mind her own business — robyn (@grigioboys) March 10, 2018  After that, the Queen went mute everytime the Beyhive attacked anyone who dared come for her. via GIPHY When Beyonce brought Jay Z on stage at Coachella Beyonce’s Coachella performance still has us snatched at our edges and we can’t get over how great and breathtaking that performance was. However, the Hive kind of got annoyed with Bey when she brought Jay Z on stage when she performed the hit single, Deja Vu. me when Beyonce brings Jay Z out on stage #coachella pic.twitter.com/ldqV0nTaVD — Bonny Billgates (@Rosaliaxx1) April 14, 2018  She really brought out Jay Z dou#Beychella #Coachella pic.twitter.com/IawuIWzxxQ — Marvin Gay (@Queen_Finxa) April 15, 2018  Jay Z rn. #Coachella pic.twitter.com/6riOQajjAT — Grayson Gregory (@Grayson_Gregory) April 15, 2018  The hive at coachella jamming to the deja vu beat and jay z comes out pic.twitter.com/GQp0L3PQ14 — sandy’s cheeks (@marcxdavid) April 15, 2018  For those who don’t know, the Beyhive is still angry at Jay Z for cheating on Beyonce not once, but numerous times. He admitted so in his 4:44 album, which was somewhat a response to Beyonce’s Lemonade album, where she hinted about her husband’s cheating.  via GIPHY