Seeking and receiving medical attention for mental health doesn’t come cheap despite South Africa being regarded as one of the major countries facing a crisis of mental illness. However, there are some counselling centres and organisations around South Africa that offer free counselling and therapy sessions. Here are eight free counselling centres you can choose from. LifeLine Johannesburg Life Line is a nonprofit organisation (NPO) that offers free counselling and 24-hour telephonic counselling for all ages and any issues you are faced with. Life Line centres can be found in Norwood, Soweto, and Alexandra. LifeLine Western Cape Like its Johannesburg counterpart, LifeLine Western Cape offers free counselling for all ages groups and have a 09:30 to 22:00 running counselling line. Or you can WhatsApp call them between 10:00 and 14:00 on 063 709 2620. Jozi Counselling Centre Jozi Counselling Centre is based in Ferndale, Randburg and offers support in dealing with personal and work related issues. The Centre offers group trauma debriefings to help deal with traumatic events, individual or couple sessions to help deal with a loss or illness, and helps you learn to cope with stress and controlling your emotions. South African Depression and Anxiety Group (SADAG) SADAG offers free telephonic counselling sessions from Monday to Sunday between 08:00 to 20:00. This group mainly focuses on dealing with mental illnesses and alleviating the stigma around it. SADAG runs a 16-line counselling and referral call centre and mainly works in urban, peri-urban, and rural areas throughout South Africa. It also has a 24-hour helpline for urgent cases. Grace Counselling Grace Counselling is Christian-based organisation that offers a variety of therapy options from dealing with mental health related issues, to dealing with spiritual related issues. It’s based in the north of Durban but it has a few centres and churches spread out throughout Durban. Revive Counselling Centre Revive is an NPO based in Port Elizabeth, Eastern Cape that offers free counselling sessions on issues such as depression and anxiety, suicidal thoughts, and dealing with traumatic experiences. While you are expected to book an appointment, the center has open days on Wednesdays, where you will be assisted even if you have not made a booking. For more information you can contact them on 041 373 8882/3. Hope House Counselling Centre Based in Cape Town, Hope House is a Christian organisation that offers therapy sessions for individuals dealing with trauma, mental illness, relationship problems, family problems, and suicide thoughts. You can find their centers in Bergvliet, Tableview, and Kuilsrivier. IThemba Counselling Centre Situated in Gauteng, Ithemba House of Hope Counselling Centre seeks to work with poorly-developed communities to help improve the lives of the disadvantaged. The counselling centre also offers support for people struggling with substance abuse.