It’s a new academic year and thousands of undergrads will be registering for their first year at university. It’s a whole other thing, this university experience. There’s no assembly, lecturers have a far more relaxed approach to making sure you do your work (they don’t), and it’s all on you to get familiar with the much larger layout of the land. Issa lot to deal with, so the veterans of the varsity game created #FreshersAdvice and dropped all kinds of wisdom. From dating and partying advice (don’t date a comrade), where to get resources, and safety tips, students from around the country shared life hacks to varsity life. In part 2 of #FreshersAdvice, The Daily Vox rounds up the five best takeaways for freshers in Gauteng, Limpopo, and North West Tshwane University of Technology TUT made a name for itself during the hay-days of Fees Must Fall with lit protests. Naturally, protesting has become a requisite skill for any TUT student.  There’s Gencor Hall. This name came up a couple of times under TUT’s #FreshersAdvice. This hall is where you’ll experience all facets of varsity life. This is the place where you’ll write tests and exams, where you’ll pass or fail, where you’ll get drunk, and ultimately where you’ll graduate. There’s Gencor Hall You write your tests there.
You write your Exams there.
&
You’ll pass in that HALL
You’ll also FAIL in that HALL. YOU gonna get your blackouts bcs Freshers balls are held there.. Most importantly You’re going to GRADUATE in that HALL.#TUTFreshersAdvice — Zweli Malcolm Mzili (@TheBestMalcolm) January 5, 2018  At TUT, it’s not just outstanding fee payments that will prevent you from seeing your marks. Unpaid library book fines will also get you blocked. Bring back your library books on time and pay your fines. TUT wants its money! #TUTFreshersAdvice While other universities are blocking their students for owing a huge sum of money, tut will block you for owing R0.50c at the library and you won’t see your RESULTS. So you better stay woke and return your books on time.  — °•SNM•° (@SnoNMtshali) January 5, 2018  University of Johannesburg With the limited resources in high demand at university, you will have to strategise when and how you can get to them. At UJ though, don’t bother going to the computer lab until 11:00. The Skeem Saam brigade occupies that place until then. Don’t bother going to the library computers in the morning. The skeem saam brigade occupies that place till around 11am #UJFRESHERSADVICE — Vusumuzi (@Vusi_Vakalisa) January 5, 2018  There are only a few minutes to get to your next class no matter the distance. Knowing the shortcuts can save you the sweat and stress. Have a class in the D labs? Take the lift inside the building to C ring 5 and walk across the bridge. Take the lift inside the building to C ring 5 and then walk across the bridge that takes you to the D Labs. You’ll know what I mean when you get there. This will save your life #UJFreshersadvice — CORBZITO (@corbzito5) January 5, 2018  It’s recommended that you bring a jacket along to class, even in this January heat. The air conditioners in the lecture halls are set to “white mode” i.e. cold af. Even when it’s hot bring a jacket , The lecture halls air conditioners are always on white mode #UJFRESHERSADVICE — Tymer (@ThamaMafukata) January 5, 2018  University of Pretoria The first year at university is one of the toughest. Tuks provides mentors and guidance through all of it for free. Check out @STARSMentorship  on Twitter to request to join. there are mentors at Tuks, request to join @STARSMentorship. They are for free and are provided by the university. You may feel you don’t need one, but 2 months down the line you might regret it. #TuksFreshersAdvice #upfreshersadvice — Yusuf (@Yuesie) January 5, 2018  ClickUP is the student’s intranet where you’ll get your assignments, online assignments, and valuable class notes. They also make important announcements there. Check it regularly. Visit your ClickUp regularly, we sometimes have Mondays on a Wednesday, so you don’t find yourself in a Chemistry class wenza iBCom. Note: ClickUp is also not a building.#UPFreshersAdvice — Gowishaer (@DaliNtanzi) January 7, 2018  Don’t ever forget your student card if you want to access the library. The security guards there will show you flames. #UPFreshersAdvice take note, the library security guards take their jobs very seriously. — T.O.G  (@tog_universe) January 6, 2018  University of Witwatersrand During Orientation Week, or O Week, you’ll be told a lot of things. Don’t let the information intimidate you. At O Week , they’ll tell you to look to the person on your left hand side & that only one of you will graduate. Don’t allow that to intimidate you or freak you out. Uzophuma neDegree wena love. #witsfreshersadvice — Kgosigadi (@AmogelangLefa) January 4, 2018  Of the many places to eat on west campus, don’t go to Zesty Lemon. Very few pockets carry the money for it. There is a place on west campus called Zesty lemon, it is not for you black child #WitsFreshersAdvice — Buti Malekere  (@NgoakoSefoko) January 4, 2018  For those who still don’t know, DON’T RAPE. Read this thread to brush up on signs to look out for about rape culture. Okay I’ll start it. This is a #rapeculture at Wits thread. #WitsFreshersAdvice — lefika. (@quaviousbeezy) January 5, 2018  University of Limpopo UL offers a very helpful and free presentation and assignment assistance at their Reading and Writing Centre (RWC). RWC (Reading & Writing Centre) ko lapologa they assist with assignments and preparations for presentations for free. #ULfreshersadvice — Vutomi Dambuza (@VeeDambuza) January 10, 2017  If you are in need of extra money and can spare the time, the A Block, B Block, D Block, cafeterias, and computer labs are hiring. #ULfreshersadvice for extra money, work at computer labs, Dblock, BBlock, ABlock, and cafeterias — KeNgwato wa 1060 (@justiceleshilo) January 10, 2017  To those who’ll be living off campus, be vigilant. If you can, stay by gate two or three. It’s not safe in Mamotintane. If you will reside offcamp, make sure it’s either gate 2 or 3 it’s not save in Mamotintane #ULfreshersadvice — mahlogedi Dudley (@mahlogedi_D) January 6, 2018  North West University People at the NWU Vaal campus call the Vaal Triangle Campus (VTC) Potch. NWU VTC is called Potch in the Vaal… don’t get lost.#NWUFreshersAdvice — Pieces (@Kgalalelo_M) January 5, 2018  AGLE is a compulsory course that teaches academic English. Take it seriously. #NWUFreshersAdvice Don’t disrespect AGLE, no natter what the seniors say! Attend dear child. — Black (@palesaemely_) January 5, 2018  Those in the know at NWU recommend skipping Friendly and doing your shopping at Spar. NWU Potch.. Walk past Friendly and go straight to Spar for groceries.. Friendly is a trap#NWUFreshersAdvice — Jollof Over Your Love  (@Andile__R) January 5, 2018  Featured Image via Wikimedia Commons  