On Wednesday night, Nike unveiled the 2018 World Cup kits for the England and Nigerian team, joining the nineteen out of the 32 teams set to be taking part in the World Cup happening later this year in Russia that have revealed their kits. #SoarSuperEagles  pic.twitter.com/5LGPW3Cpxo — The NFF  (@thenff) February 7, 2018  However, out of all the kits revealed, we have to say that The Super Eagles green and white kit is the best thing ever and it’s seem a lot of people agree. (The Nigerian team affectionately known as the Super Eagles in reference to the eagle that appears on the national flag of the country) The Mirror has the kit at number one on their power ranking for the kits that have been revealed so far.  Egypt’s classic red checked kit made it to number 11 on the list. However, that kit is nowhere near as spectacular as the Nigerian kit. Nigeria released their World Cup kit yesterday and its safe to say its absolute fire. Brilliant job by @nikefootball to produce that. Egypt’s kit (which is horribly bland and plain) looks like it has had absolutely no attention from @adidasfootball…..Embarrassing. pic.twitter.com/haJZEBBMvq — Egypt Football (@Football_Egypt) February 8, 2018  Unveiled in a Nike YouTube video with the other kits from the company, three of members of the national team reacted to the kit.  Wilfred Ndidi, John Obi Mikel, Alex Iwobi and Kelechi Iheanacho all gave their verdict on the kit and were quite impressed with the home shirt with comes in Nigeria’s iconic dark green with an eye-catching neon logo. “I can see the players going crazy over this one,” Mikel said when he was shown the national side’s home shirt, in Nigeria’s famous dark green with an eye-catching neon logo. The home kit is inspired by the first shirt worn by the team in 1994 World Cup which is the first tournament they qualified for. The away kit comes in a light green and white chevron pattern which is equally aesthetically pleasing. The jackets which the players will be wearing over their kits when the team stands for the national anthem has the Super Eagle taping along the shoulders. The sleeve of the jacket also read Naija. The kit reportedly symbolises this concept, Naija which describes the elements of Nigerian culture which have spread to the diaspora communities all around the world. Naija does not just represent Nigeria culture but also a future-focused optimism for what Nigeria can be and it is this spirit according to Supersport that is filtered into the kit. “With Nigeria, we wanted to tap into the attitude of the nation,” notes Nike Football design director Dan Farron. “We built this kit and collection based on the players’ full identities. We started to see trends in attitude and energy connecting the athletes to music, fashion and more. They are part of a resoundingly cool culture,” he said. “A constant in Nigeria is an endearing love of football,” NFF President Amaju Pinnick, told Nike’s official website. “When football is on, everything stops. The new Nike kit designs honour our federation’s rich traditions. Moreover, they celebrate everything we relish about our culture.” And people had plenty of praise for the kit. Nigeria have the best kit at this year’s World Cup, pass it on. pic.twitter.com/bFtG3meVxc — Tobi Oke (@TefTobz) February 7, 2018  With echoing sentiments that Nigeria can win the tournament just based on their kits. Nigeria should win the World Cup on the strength of their home kit  pic.twitter.com/mWpvnJ3gDr — UNILAD Football (@UNILADFooty) February 7, 2018  NIGERIA’S WORLD CUP KIT IS W AF DON’T @ ME PLS!!!!! pic.twitter.com/UQ7VUXt9zR — The Boi (@ChuBoi) February 7, 2018  Nigeria’s Nike kit might be fire but the Cameroonian Puma kit which was released last year is also a thing of beauty. The new Cameroon kit though  #Cameroon #WorldCup2018 #WorldCup pic.twitter.com/PNp8fbZS6g — The FIFA Ramble (@TheFIFARamble) February 8, 2018  All we can say is that if these African countries are bringing so much slayage with only their kits, we can only hope they can translate that onto the pitch as well. The kit will be available at most sport shops in South Africa shortly.