On Wednesday, Black Panther star Lupita Nyong’o (a literal queen in our view) announced that she would be acting in, and producing a feature film based on Born A Crime: Stories from a South African Childhood, the autobiography based on the childhood of Daily Show host and South African comedian Trevor Noah. When I read @Trevornoah‘s “Born A Crime,” I could not put the book down. Excited to announce that I will be starring in and producing its feature film adaptation! #BornACrimehttps://t.co/v4AfGe23P5 pic.twitter.com/QvrsETIEAc — Lupita Nyong’o (@Lupita_Nyongo) February 21, 2018  Taking to Twitter to make the announcement, Nyong’o said that while she was reading the book she could not put it down and was so excited, she would be involved in the adaptation project. Nyong’o is currently playing Nakia in the Black Panther movies which has been making waves all around the world. Noah also posted on Twitter his excitement about the movie and that fact the Lupita would be in the project. Noah will be involved in the making of the movie. I’m in heaven! https://t.co/wLK81WsIoo — Trevor Noah (@Trevornoah) February 22, 2018  Trevor Noah’s book was released in 2016 and the title drew confusion from American audiences. Some didn’t understand the fact that Noah was born to a Xhosa mother and white Swiss father during the apartheid era, when mixed race relationships and marriages were prohibited. The book has been on the bestseller list since its release and has won the James Thurber Prize for American Humor and two NAACP Image Awards. Noah posted a picture of himself with Nyong’o and more details about the role that she would be taking in the film. Nyong’o will play the role of Noah’s mother, Patricia Nombuyiselo Noah in the film. Patricia played an important role in Noah’s life and she features prominently in his biography. The book has been described not just as an account of Noah’s childhood but also a love letter to his mother. At one point in the book, Noah writes about why his mother named him Trevor, as the names chosen for Xhosa children usually have meaning. Noah writes that his mother gave him the name which did not have any meaning deliberately. “It’s not even a biblical name,” he writes. “It’s just a name. My mother wanted her child beholden to no fate. She wanted me to be free to go anywhere, do anything, be anyone.” Noah took to Instagram to say: “My mother is a powerful woman who could easily be one of the beautiful soldiers in Wakanda. So it’s beyond a perfect fit that she would be portrayed on the big screen by the radiant and regal Lupita Nyong’o. I’m beyond excited.”  Noah will be producing the feature film project through his Ark Angel Productions alongside Nyong’o. Norman Aladjem, Derek Van Pelt and Sanaz Yamin of Mainstay Entertainment will also be a part of the project. People also took to Twitter to share their excitement about the news. Trevor Noah’s Born A Crime is gonna be made into a movie and Lupita’s gonna be in it! — Can’t Tell Me Nothing (@DamnDelete) February 22, 2018  They weren’t sure if they were happy because Trevor Noah’s book is being adapted into a film or that Nyong’o will be playing his mother. Not sure what makes me happier – That there’s going to be a movie based on @trevornoah ‘Born a Crime’ or that @Lupita_Nyongo is going to play in it! <3 https://t.co/yOsUlRviCl via @deadline — Aguu (@aguu) February 22, 2018  Plenty of people also had questions about who would be playing Noah in the movie as his role has not yet been cast. I wonder who will Lupita and her team cast to play Trevor Noah in the movie #BornACrime after seeing what Lupita did with #QueenofKatwe i’m confident she will deliver — Thabang Phetla (@tarantular) February 22, 2018  Some even said they hope a South African actor will be cast as Noah in the lead role. He must also bring in South African actors, afterall the story actually occurred here in S.A — Indiphile Matshayana (@IMatshayana) February 22, 2018  While others were just stoked that a movie would be made about South Africa’s favourite export. Forget about Lupita starring in it I’m just stoked that Trevor Noah’s book will be turned into a damn movie — Catch 22  (@P_buddy) February 22, 2018  However, some raised questions saying it would perhaps be better for a South African actor to play Noah’s mother. No offense, Lupita is a great talent.. Just think it will be more appropriate to have a #Southafrican #Xhosa woman portraying @Trevornoah‘s mum,but then again, it’s always been the case of #African stories being portrayed by American actor/actresses, when will this ever end? — Thiza Makwa (@makwatee) February 22, 2018  Tell us if you’re excited for the movie as well as who should play Trevor Noah in the movie. Tweet us or comment below.