“May the oath or the affirmation judge most brutally any of us who is here for a show or any of us who will betray the constitutional aspirations of the people of South Africa,” Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng warned the new deputy president, ministers, and deputy ministers on Tuesday. The opening by Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng. — Refilwe (@Rock_sie) February 27, 2018  The judge dropped some serious constitutional bars at the swearing-in ceremony of President Cyril Ramaphosa’s new cabinet members, following his reshuffle announcement. Cyril Ramaphosa’s New Cabinet – Who’s In, Who’s Out  #SwearingIn You know the country is still traumatised when the Chief Justice starts off by warning new ministers & the deputy president of the importance of the oath of office & the allegiance they must have to the republic #AfterZuma — Matshidiso Madia (@tshidi_lee) February 27, 2018  Among the new cabinet members is Nhlanhla Nene who has returned as the minister of finance, Pravin Gordhan who has returned as minister of public enterprises, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma who will head planning, monitoring and evaluation in the Presidency. Dubious characters like Malusi Gigaba, Bathabile Dlamini, and Nomvula Mokonyane have been retained and moved to new portfolios. Perhaps one of the most dodgy politicians to be appointed in the new reshuffle is former Mpumalanga premier and ANC deputy president David Mabuza, who was appointed as deputy president of the country. He has been described as “an architect of state capture”. #CabinetReshuffle #SwearingIn Deputy President David Mabuza takes his oath of office pic.twitter.com/ygTMK8j6fo — SA Gov News (@SAgovnews) February 27, 2018  Each of the new Cabinet members had to take an oath of office in accordance with section 95 of the Constitution. It reads that before the deputy president, the ministers, and any deputy ministers perform their functions, they must swear or affirm faithfulness to the Republic and obedience to the Constitution in accordance to Schedule 2. But the CJ departed from his script to remind the new Cabinet members about the significance of an oath of office. “We are not here for a photoshoot. We’re not here for a photo opportunity. We can’t travel all this long just to come gather and undertake an insignificant task,” he said. #SwearingIn Just imagine if you violate such a powerful oath. pic.twitter.com/K9eTuzUC8k — KhayelihleKhumalo (@KhayaJames) February 27, 2018  “You’ve come to enter into a formal contract with the people of South Africa. This oath of office or affirmation is going to judge you before the public even dares to do so,” the CJ said. Chief Justice Mogoeng: “Ministers must swear and affirm faithfulness to the Republic.” Courtesy #DStv403 pic.twitter.com/NzNphVK0TN — eNCA (@eNCA) February 27, 2018  Former social development minister Bathabile Dlamini, who is now the women’s minister, has brazenly flouted rulings by the constitutional court, endangering the lives of millions of South African grant recipients because of a dodgy contract with the grant suppliers CPS. CJ Mogoeng Mogoeng said: “The assumption is only people who have a measure of integrity and credibility and some character to write home about are going to be presented here before the nation as those who are going to serve them as dictated by the constitution”. Was this a subtweet? Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng’s prefacing of today’s swearing in gives you a sense of how gatvol he has been with constitutional breaches. “You are swearing allegiance to the republic! Conscientize yourselves about the profundity of the responsibility you are assuming!” — Bongani Bingwa – Host of 702 Breakfast. (@bonglez) February 27, 2018  He reminded the congregation that he was there “because our history since 1994 renders it absolutely necessary that we conscientise ourselves as deputy president, ministers, and deputy ministers about the profundity of the responsibility we are about to assume”. He said it wasn’t about assuming power to look important, or to have resources distributed to your department or section so that we can look like we owe you something. I’m not being sworn in as a minister, but I’ve just been delivered the fear of god in me by Mogoeng. — Lester Kiewit (@lesterkk) February 27, 2018 “It is to become a servant to the people of SA,” CJ Mogoeng Mogoeng said, “and may the oath… judge most brutally any of us who is here for a show or any of us who will betray the constitutional aspirations of people of South Africa.” Mogoeng Mogoeng speaking truth to power, reminding them of oath of office, allegiance to the republic! They must become servants of the people! — Mahlatse Mahlase (@hlatseentle) February 27, 2018  Mogoeng Mogoeng was not necessarily the ‘preferred’ candidate for chief justice. He was accused by many (including the cartoonist Zapiro) of being a crony of Jacob Zuma (another brazen flouter of the Constitution). Remember this? pic.twitter.com/TwQXoqUhkd — Mcambalala (@ThulaniMabuzaZA) September 25, 2017  Those people could not have been more wrong. “I’m just saying maybe in the same way as they often do in a wedding ceremony. If after reflection you consider yourself disqualified I’m sure the Pres won’t mind if you pull out,” the CJ said before carrying on with the rest of the ceremony. I maintain, my life mission is never to rise that high in career or social position to be afforded a kakking out by Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng. — Lester Kiewit (@lesterkk) February 27, 2018 