The Department of Water and Sanitation along with five other organisations revealed the #SaveWater mascot called Splash on Thursday. This was part of the newly-launched #SaveWater Ambassador Programme which they hope will encourage Cape Town citizens to save water in order to avoid the dreaded Day Zero. The project is partnered with Miss Earth SA, Operation SA, Tsogo Sun, the Muslim Judicial Council and the South African Rugby Union. It’s all systems go, launch of the #SaveWater ambassador programme pic.twitter.com/JbV5sJGit7 — Water&SanitationRSA (@DWS_RSA) February 15, 2018  The mascot consists of a huge white water drop atop a green body. That seems weird enough but what is even more creepy is that evil smirk the water drop has on its face. Predictably, Twitter had all of the thoughts regarding the mascot. From being labelled the creepy dictator: when you’re trying to be a tyrannical dictator but your minions use hashtags weirdly pic.twitter.com/17mNuq9zUs — ˢᵐᵒᶫ ᵐᵉᵉˢʰ  (@micherable) February 16, 2018  To the most horrifying image people will have to see as Cape Town approaches Day Zero, the ambassador did not impress anybody. The list of the worst things people will see including Helen Zille’s toes! We’ve seen some horrifying images during this Cape Town water crisis. All we can do is band together and support one another during this troubling time pic.twitter.com/GNbWqhfv9v — Sibongile Mafu (@sboshmafu) February 15, 2018  Twitter users also couldn’t resist meming the mascot as the serial killer whispering behind the door to SAVE WATER! SAAAAAAAVE WATER! pic.twitter.com/Lamp3elOh6 — Elephant Dev™ (@nukehead) February 16, 2018  Someone even superimposed Splash’s face onto the Mona Lisa and a horror flick serial killer. I think I may have gone too far with this one. #SaveWater pic.twitter.com/uc1I17JpC0 — I’m smarter than you’re (@qornea) February 16, 2018  Halloween H20 (1998) pic.twitter.com/h7o2iJm2Uq — KURTWEETY (@KurtLaduma) February 16, 2018  Others made up really frightening nursery rhymes for when Splash would be coming for you if you didn’t save water. 1, 2, Splash is coming for you
3, 4, better slow that flow
5, 6, desalination is the fix
7, 8, level 6B is the state
9, 10, never waste again… pic.twitter.com/BxUlDjvzCg — Mat (@ThatJerryBoi) February 16, 2018  Comedian Rob van Vuuren said Day Zero would be when the mascot murders everybody. (could totally see it happened. I mean who is under there anyway?) Day Zero is when this guy murders everyone. pic.twitter.com/LrIo9GeO2Y — Rob Van Vuuren (@RobVanVuuren) February 16, 2018  Splash might not be convincing anyone but sure as hell will be scaring people into listening to them. Never flush again pic.twitter.com/OrJPaNcWeE — Zardu Hasselfrau (@Zombie_Phil) February 16, 2018  [extremely demonic voice] you gon’ eat that? pic.twitter.com/EhRxU4CoDW — Megan Stacy Deane (@MegStaDeane) February 16, 2018  We need answers DoWS! How did you think Splash was going to encourage people to save water??