Billionaire businessman Patrice Motsepe paid to bring the Spanish soccer team FC Barcelona to Johannesburg this week, to take on Sundowns in a friendly match as part of the Nelson Mandela Centenary celebrations. The Spanish side won 3 – 1 on the night. While we applaud Motsepe for bringing an international team to play against one of our best local soccer teams, after that humiliating defeat, MIHLALI NTSABO says we would have rather had him bring Beyonce to perform in SA instead and here’s why. No South African would have been humiliated There is no argument that South Africa was humiliated by that 3-1 defeat. If you had actually took the money and brought Beyonce instead, we wouldn’t have felt as humiliated as we did on Wednesday. Why is Barcelona playing sundowns, why must we be humiliated like that pic.twitter.com/J1TdOVUfe9 — Klonnie13 (@Klonie13) May 16, 2018  A part of me is sad that sundowns is getting humiliated in the context of representing SAand another part of me is glad sundowns is getting humbled HARD. Sundowns fans were beginning to think they’re man city#SundownsBarça pic.twitter.com/X3sUbHFVJL — Sive Siganagana (@C_Veh_) May 16, 2018   via GIPHY They lost… again This is not the first time Sundowns has lost against Barcelona. The team lost 2-1 when they played against them in 2007. That should have been a lesson not to try one of the best international soccer teams out there.  via GIPHY Best live performer I think we all can agree that Sundown’s performance was quite amateurish, and that’s a huge yikes from us. (Editor’s note: Um, Sundowns did fine, smh.) However, if that money was used to bring Beyonce, we know for a fact that everyone would have watched the performance of a lifetime. I mean Beyonce, is the queen of snatching performances, or maybe that’s just us.  via GIPHY She performed for Nelson Mandela before… and killed it If Motsepe really wanted to add “celebration” to the Nelson Mandela Centenary celebration, then Beyonce would have would have made it feel like a celebration, like the last time she did when she performed for Nelson Mandela at the 46664 concert.  via GIPHY Beyonce pays her taxes Why would you bring people, like Lionel Messi who evade paying their taxes, when Queen Bey is on track with her financial books? Just asking…(sips tea)  via GIPHY To the Sundowns team, shame, you all tried and we will give you props for that. But still, Beyonce would have been a better option.